Welcome to Anaesthesia Compendium. Today's viva station:
the principles of pharmacodynamics. I shall take the candidate through it,
question by question. Let us begin.
Good morning. We turn to pharmacodynamics. Define it,
and contrast it with pharmacokinetics.
Pharmacodynamics is the study of what a drug does to the body — the relationship
between the concentration of a drug at its site of action and the biological effect
it produces, together with the mechanisms by which that effect comes about.
Pharmacokinetics, in contrast, is what the body does to the drug,
the time course of absorption, distribution, metabolism and excretion.
Pharmacokinetics determines the concentration reaching the receptor;
pharmacodynamics determines the response to that concentration.
In anaesthesia the minimum alveolar concentration of a volatile agent is a
pharmacodynamic measure — a concentration related to an effect — while the way that
concentration is reached and maintained is pharmacokinetic.
Understanding both is essential to safe titration.
Most drugs act on receptors. Describe the principal types of receptor.
Receptors are macromolecules, usually proteins,
with which a drug interacts to produce its effect.
There are four superfamilies, classified by their structure and signalling speed.
Ligand-gated ion channels, such as the GABA-A and nicotinic acetylcholine
receptors, act in milliseconds: ligand binding opens an ion channel directly.
G-protein-coupled receptors, such as adrenergic and opioid receptors,
act over seconds, transducing the signal through a G-protein to second messengers
such as cyclic AMP or via phospholipase C.
Kinase-linked receptors, such as the insulin receptor,
act over minutes to hours through phosphorylation cascades.
And nuclear receptors, such as those for steroids and thyroid hormone,
act over hours by altering gene transcription.
The anaesthetist works most often with the first two,
given the importance of GABA-A, nicotinic, adrenergic and opioid pharmacology.
Define agonist, antagonist and partial agonist.
An agonist is a drug that binds to a receptor and activates it to produce a
response; a full agonist produces the maximal possible response of which the system
is capable.
An antagonist binds to the receptor but produces no activation itself;
it has affinity but no efficacy, and it acts by preventing an agonist from binding
or acting.
A partial agonist binds and activates the receptor but,
even at full receptor occupancy, cannot produce the maximal response — it has lower
intrinsic efficacy.
A partial agonist is interesting because in the presence of a full agonist it can
behave as an antagonist, occupying receptors while producing only a submaximal
effect. Buprenorphine, a partial agonist at the mu opioid receptor,
illustrates this dual behaviour.
Explain the different forms of antagonism.
Antagonism may be competitive or non-competitive.
A competitive antagonist binds reversibly to the same site as the agonist,
and the two compete; the effect is surmountable,
because increasing the agonist concentration can overcome the block,
shifting the agonist dose-response curve to the right in parallel without reducing
the maximal response.
A non-competitive antagonist either binds irreversibly to the agonist site or binds
to a separate, allosteric site; the block cannot be fully overcome by more agonist,
so the maximal response is reduced and the curve is depressed.
There is also physiological or functional antagonism,
where two drugs act at different receptors to produce opposing effects — adrenaline
opposing histamine in anaphylaxis is the example — and chemical antagonism,
where one agent binds another directly, as protamine binds heparin.
Distinguishing these matters because a competitive block can be overcome and an
irreversible one cannot.
What is an inverse agonist?
An inverse agonist binds to a receptor that has constitutive activity — that is,
some baseline signalling in the absence of any agonist — and reduces that activity
below the baseline.
It therefore produces the opposite effect to an agonist,
whereas a neutral antagonist merely blocks and leaves the constitutive activity
unchanged.
The concept is most relevant where receptors have appreciable constitutive
activity; some benzodiazepine-site ligands, the beta-carbolines,
are inverse agonists at the GABA-A receptor and are anxiogenic and proconvulsant,
the opposite of the benzodiazepine agonists.
It is a useful concept because it refines the simple agonist-antagonist dichotomy
into a continuum of efficacy ranging from full agonist through partial agonist and
neutral antagonist to inverse agonist.
Distinguish potency from efficacy.
Potency refers to the amount of drug required to produce a given effect — a more
potent drug produces its effect at a lower dose or concentration,
reflected in a leftward position of the dose-response curve and a lower EC-fifty,
the concentration producing fifty per cent of the maximal effect.
Efficacy refers to the maximal effect a drug can produce regardless of dose,
reflected in the height of the plateau of the curve.
The two are independent: a drug may be highly potent but have low efficacy,
like a partial agonist, or have lower potency but high efficacy.
Clinically, potency determines the dose I prescribe but efficacy determines the
ceiling of effect achievable. Fentanyl is more potent than morphine — it acts at a
far lower dose — but both are full agonists with similar efficacy at the mu
receptor.
Describe the dose-response relationship and the difference between graded and
quantal curves.
A graded dose-response curve plots the magnitude of a continuous response in an
individual against dose or concentration;
the response increases with dose until a maximum is reached.
When plotted against the logarithm of dose it forms a characteristic sigmoid curve,
the central, linear portion of which is most useful for comparing drugs and from
which the EC-fifty is read.
A quantal dose-response curve, by contrast,
plots the proportion of a population showing an all-or-none response — present or
absent, such as loss of consciousness or abolition of movement — against dose.
From the quantal curve we derive the ED-fifty,
the dose effective in half the population, and, in toxicology, the LD-fifty.
The minimum alveolar concentration of a volatile agent is essentially a quantal
measure: the concentration preventing movement in fifty per cent of subjects at a
standard stimulus.
What is the therapeutic index, and why is it important?
The therapeutic index is a measure of the safety margin of a drug,
classically defined as the ratio of the dose producing toxicity in fifty per cent
of the population, the toxic or lethal dose-fifty,
to the dose producing the therapeutic effect in fifty per cent,
the effective dose-fifty.
A large therapeutic index indicates a wide margin between effective and toxic doses
and a relatively safe drug; a small index indicates that the effective and toxic
doses are close, so the drug must be dosed and monitored carefully.
Many anaesthetic drugs have a relatively narrow therapeutic index — the dose
producing anaesthesia is not far from the dose producing dangerous cardiovascular
or respiratory depression — which is precisely why they are given by trained
anaesthetists with full monitoring and titrated to effect rather than given as
fixed doses.
Explain affinity and the law of mass action as they apply to receptor binding.
Affinity is the tendency of a drug to bind to its receptor,
the strength of the drug-receptor interaction.
Receptor binding is governed by the law of mass action:
the rate of formation of the drug-receptor complex is proportional to the product
of the concentrations of free drug and free receptor,
and at equilibrium the rates of association and dissociation are equal.
The dissociation constant, KD, is the concentration of drug at which half the
receptors are occupied, and it is an inverse measure of affinity — a low KD means
high affinity.
Affinity is a property of both agonists and antagonists, because both must bind;
what distinguishes an agonist is that, having bound, it also possesses efficacy,
the ability to activate the receptor and produce a response.
This separation of binding from activation is fundamental to receptor pharmacology.
What do you understand by receptor reserve, or spare receptors?
Receptor reserve, or the spare-receptor phenomenon,
describes the situation in which a maximal tissue response can be achieved when
only a fraction of the available receptors is occupied by an agonist.
In other words, there are more receptors than are needed to produce the maximal
effect.
The consequence is that the concentration producing half the maximal effect,
the EC-fifty, is lower than the concentration occupying half the receptors, the KD;
the dose-response curve lies to the left of the occupancy curve.
Receptor reserve increases the sensitivity of a tissue to an agonist and influences
how a given degree of receptor antagonism translates into loss of response — with a
large reserve, a substantial proportion of receptors can be blocked before the
maximal response falls.
The neuromuscular junction has a recognised margin of safety related to this idea.
Describe signal transduction and the role of second messengers.
Signal transduction is the process by which the binding of a drug at a receptor on
the cell surface is converted into an intracellular response.
For ligand-gated channels the transduction is direct — the channel opens and ions
flow.
For G-protein-coupled receptors the bound receptor activates a G-protein,
which in turn modulates an effector enzyme or channel,
generating an intracellular second messenger that amplifies and propagates the
signal.
Common second messengers include cyclic AMP,
generated by adenylyl cyclase and acting through protein kinase A;
inositol trisphosphate and diacylglycerol,
generated by phospholipase C and mobilising intracellular calcium;
and cyclic GMP and nitric oxide in vascular smooth muscle.
This cascade structure provides amplification — one bound receptor can generate
many messenger molecules — and multiple points for regulation and pharmacological
intervention.
What is hysteresis in a concentration-effect relationship?
Hysteresis describes a situation in which the relationship between plasma
concentration and effect is not a single line but a loop,
because the effect lags behind or, less commonly, leads the plasma concentration.
The commonest cause is the time taken for the drug to equilibrate between the
plasma and the effect-site, so that for a given plasma concentration the effect is
less while the concentration is rising and greater while it is falling,
producing a counter-clockwise loop.
This is why the effect-site and the rate constant ke0 are introduced — to collapse
the loop into a single concentration-effect relationship by relating effect to the
effect-site rather than the plasma concentration.
Hysteresis can also arise from active metabolites,
tolerance developing during the measurement, or sensitisation.
Define tolerance, tachyphylaxis and desensitisation, and explain the mechanisms.
Tolerance is a reduction in response to a drug following its repeated
administration, so that a larger dose is needed to produce the original effect;
it usually develops over days to weeks, as with opioids.
Tachyphylaxis is a rapid tolerance developing over minutes to hours with repeated
dosing, classically seen with indirectly acting sympathomimetics such as ephedrine,
where repeated doses deplete the neuronal noradrenaline stores they rely upon.
Desensitisation is loss of receptor responsiveness, which may be homologous,
affecting only the stimulated receptor, or heterologous.
The mechanisms include receptor phosphorylation and uncoupling from their
G-proteins, internalisation of receptors, down-regulation reducing receptor number,
depletion of an intermediary such as a neurotransmitter,
and increased metabolism through enzyme induction.
Conversely, chronic antagonism or denervation can cause up-regulation and
supersensitivity, which is the basis of the exaggerated,
dangerous potassium release seen with suxamethonium in conditions with up-regulated
extrajunctional receptors.
How do drugs interact when given together — additivity, synergy and antagonism?
When two drugs act together their combined effect may be additive,
synergistic or antagonistic. Additivity is when the combined effect equals the sum
of the individual effects, expected when two drugs act by the same mechanism.
Synergy, or supra-additivity, is when the combined effect exceeds the sum of the
parts, often seen when drugs act at different sites in the same pathway — the
profound synergy between propofol and an opioid such as remifentanil on hypnosis
and on suppression of responses is the everyday anaesthetic example,
allowing the dose of each to be reduced.
Antagonism is when the combined effect is less than expected.
These interactions can be represented graphically by isoboles — lines of equal
effect plotted for combinations of two drugs — where a curve bowing towards the
origin indicates synergy and one bowing away indicates antagonism.
Recognising synergy is clinically vital,
because it explains both the efficiency and the hazard of drug combinations.
How does stereochemistry influence pharmacodynamics?
Many drugs are chiral, existing as enantiomers — mirror-image isomers — that are
not superimposable. Because receptors are themselves chiral,
the enantiomers may differ markedly in their affinity, efficacy,
kinetics and side-effects.
The drug may be marketed as a racemic mixture of both, or as a single,
purified enantiomer.
Examples in anaesthesia include levobupivacaine,
the single S-enantiomer of bupivacaine,
developed because it is less cardiotoxic than the racemate; ketamine,
whose S-enantiomer is more potent and produces fewer emergence phenomena than the
R-form; and the dramatic difference between the enantiomers in older
sympathomimetics.
The general lesson is that the convenient assumption of a single active species is
often an oversimplification, and that separating enantiomers can improve the
therapeutic ratio.
Besides receptors, by what other mechanisms do drugs produce their effects?
Not all drug action is receptor-mediated. Drugs may act on enzymes,
as inhibitors or, less often, as false substrates — anticholinesterases inhibiting
acetylcholinesterase, or aspirin irreversibly inhibiting cyclo-oxygenase.
They may act on ion channels directly,
as local anaesthetics block voltage-gated sodium channels and calcium-channel
blockers block their target.
They may act on transporters and carrier proteins,
such as the reuptake transporters blocked by some antidepressants,
or the sodium-potassium pump inhibited by digoxin.
Some act by physicochemical means — antacids by simple neutralisation,
osmotic diuretics and laxatives by osmotic effect, chelating agents by binding.
And some, such as the volatile anaesthetics,
have effects on lipid membranes and multiple ion-channel targets that are still
incompletely understood. So the receptor model, while central,
is only part of the picture.
Finally, what causes variability in drug response between patients?
Variability arises from both pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic sources.
Kinetic variability comes from differences in absorption, distribution,
metabolism and excretion — age, organ function, body composition,
protein binding and drug interactions.
Pharmacodynamic variability comes from differences in receptor number and
sensitivity, in the state of the system, and in physiological reserve,
so that the same concentration produces different effects.
Genetic variation — pharmacogenetics — underlies much of this:
variation in metabolising enzymes such as the cytochromes and plasma
cholinesterase, in transporters, and in receptors.
Disease, the timing of dosing relative to circadian rhythms, tolerance,
and drug interactions all add to it.
The practical consequence is that population dose recommendations are starting
points only, and that drugs of narrow therapeutic index must be titrated to the
individual's response under monitoring.
You mentioned the GABA-A and benzodiazepine sites. Explain allosteric modulation.
An allosteric modulator binds to a site on the receptor distinct from the
orthosteric site where the endogenous agonist binds,
and changes the receptor's response to that agonist.
A positive allosteric modulator increases the response — the benzodiazepines are
the classic example, binding at their own site on the GABA-A receptor and enhancing
the effect of GABA by increasing the frequency of chloride-channel opening,
but producing no effect of their own in the absence of GABA.
A negative allosteric modulator reduces the response.
The key features that distinguish allosteric modulation from orthosteric agonism
are that it requires the presence of the endogenous agonist to have an effect,
and that its effect has a ceiling once the allosteric sites are saturated — which
is part of why benzodiazepines are relatively safe in overdose compared with
barbiturates, which can open the channel directly.
Describe drug-receptor binding kinetics — the on and off rates.
Binding is a dynamic equilibrium.
The association rate describes how quickly the drug binds the receptor and depends
on the drug concentration and the association rate constant;
the dissociation rate describes how quickly it leaves and depends on the
dissociation rate constant alone.
The ratio of dissociation to association rate constants is the equilibrium
dissociation constant, KD, the concentration occupying half the receptors and an
inverse measure of affinity.
The dissociation rate also determines the residence time of the drug on the
receptor, which can be clinically important:
a slowly dissociating antagonist behaves in a manner approaching irreversibility
within the timeframe of interest, and the duration of some drug effects is governed
more by how slowly the drug leaves the receptor than by its plasma kinetics.
This dynamic view explains why competitive blocks can be overcome by raising
agonist concentration, whereas very slowly dissociating drugs cannot easily be
displaced.
How would you quantify the potency of a competitive antagonist?
A competitive antagonist shifts the agonist log-dose-response curve to the right in
a parallel fashion, and the magnitude of that shift depends on the antagonist
concentration and affinity.
This is analysed using Schild's method:
the dose ratio — the factor by which the agonist concentration must be increased to
restore a given response in the presence of antagonist — is measured at several
antagonist concentrations, and a Schild plot is constructed.
From it the pA-two is derived, the negative logarithm of the antagonist
concentration that necessitates a doubling of the agonist dose;
it is a concentration-independent measure of antagonist potency.
A linear Schild plot with unit slope confirms simple competitive antagonism.
While this is a laboratory technique,
the underlying principle — that a competitive block is surmountable and
quantifiable — is what matters clinically.
What does the slope of the dose-response curve tell you?
The steepness of the dose-response curve, captured by the Hill coefficient,
reflects how the response changes as concentration increases and gives a clue to
the underlying mechanism.
A steep curve, with a Hill coefficient greater than one,
suggests positive cooperativity, where the binding of one molecule facilitates the
binding of the next, as occurs with oxygen binding to haemoglobin.
A coefficient of one describes simple single-site binding.
The clinical importance of a steep concentration-effect relationship is that small
changes in concentration produce large changes in effect,
which makes a drug harder to titrate and narrows the margin between too little and
too much.
Many anaesthetic effects have fairly steep relationships,
which is one reason careful titration and monitoring are necessary.
Distinguish selectivity from specificity.
Specificity strictly means that a drug acts on a single type of receptor or target
and produces a single effect; in reality no drug is truly specific.
Selectivity is the more realistic concept:
a drug acts preferentially on one target or produces one effect at therapeutic
doses, but loses that preference and acts on other targets as the dose rises.
A beta-one-selective antagonist, for instance,
preferentially blocks cardiac beta-one receptors at usual doses but blocks
bronchial beta-two receptors as well at higher doses,
which is why cardioselectivity cannot be relied upon in the asthmatic at large
doses.
Recognising that selectivity is dose-dependent rather than absolute is important,
because side-effects often represent the loss of selectivity at higher
concentrations.
Expand on receptor regulation — up-regulation,
down-regulation and denervation supersensitivity.
Receptor number and sensitivity are not fixed but are regulated in response to
stimulation.
Chronic exposure to an agonist tends to cause down-regulation — a reduction in
receptor number through internalisation and reduced synthesis — and
desensitisation, contributing to tolerance.
Conversely, chronic reduction in stimulation,
as with prolonged antagonist therapy or, dramatically, with denervation,
causes up-regulation — an increase in receptor number — and supersensitivity to
agonist.
The clinically dangerous example is the proliferation of extrajunctional
acetylcholine receptors after burns, prolonged immobility,
denervation injury or critical illness: suxamethonium then triggers a massive,
potentially fatal potassium efflux.
The sudden withdrawal of a chronically administered beta-blocker,
unmasking up-regulated, supersensitive beta-receptors, is another.
So receptor regulation has direct, sometimes lethal, anaesthetic implications.
Distinguish pharmacokinetic from pharmacodynamic tolerance,
and define cross-tolerance.
Tolerance can arise by two broad mechanisms.
Pharmacokinetic, or dispositional, tolerance results from the body handling the
drug differently with repeated exposure — typically enzyme induction increasing the
rate of metabolism, so that a given dose produces a lower concentration.
Pharmacodynamic tolerance results from adaptive changes at the site of action —
receptor down-regulation, desensitisation,
or compensatory changes in the system — so that a given concentration produces a
smaller effect.
Many tolerant states, such as chronic opioid or alcohol use, involve both.
Cross-tolerance is the phenomenon in which tolerance to one drug confers tolerance
to another, usually pharmacologically related,
drug — for example cross-tolerance between alcohol and benzodiazepines,
or between opioids — and it is clinically relevant because the chronically exposed
patient may require markedly higher doses of an anaesthetic agent in the same class.
Classify adverse drug reactions.
A practical classification divides adverse drug reactions into type A and type B.
Type A reactions are augmented — they are dose-dependent,
predictable from the known pharmacology of the drug, common,
and usually reversible by dose reduction;
examples are the respiratory depression of opioids or the hypotension of propofol.
Type B reactions are bizarre — they are not dose-dependent,
not predictable from the ordinary pharmacology, uncommon, and often more serious;
they include idiosyncratic and immunological reactions such as anaphylaxis and
malignant hyperthermia.
Further categories are sometimes added — type C for chronic effects,
type D for delayed effects such as carcinogenesis or teratogenesis,
and type E for end-of-treatment effects such as withdrawal.
The distinction matters because type A reactions are managed by understanding and
adjusting the pharmacology, whereas type B reactions require avoidance and, often,
urgent specific treatment.
Describe the hypersensitivity reactions relevant to anaesthesia.
Immunological hypersensitivity is classified by the Gell and Coombs system into
four types.
Type one is immediate, IgE-mediated hypersensitivity — anaphylaxis — in which prior
sensitisation leads to mast-cell and basophil degranulation on re-exposure,
releasing histamine and other mediators;
this is the life-threatening perioperative anaphylaxis to neuromuscular blockers,
antibiotics and other agents.
Type two is antibody-mediated cytotoxicity,
as in some drug-induced haemolytic anaemias and heparin-induced thrombocytopenia.
Type three is immune-complex mediated, as in serum sickness.
Type four is delayed, T-cell mediated hypersensitivity,
the mechanism of contact dermatitis and some delayed drug rashes.
The anaesthetist is principally concerned with type one,
because of its speed and severity, but should recognise that other mechanisms exist
and that not every adverse reaction at induction is anaphylaxis.
What do you understand by idiosyncrasy and pharmacogenetic variation in drug
response?
An idiosyncratic reaction is a qualitatively abnormal response to a drug,
peculiar to the individual and not explained by the ordinary pharmacology;
many such reactions have turned out to have a genetic basis.
Pharmacogenetics studies how inherited variation alters drug response,
and it operates on both the kinetic and the dynamic side.
On the dynamic side, examples include malignant hyperthermia,
an inherited susceptibility of the ryanodine receptor triggered by volatile agents
and suxamethonium; the porphyrias, in which barbiturates can precipitate an acute
attack; and glucose-six-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency,
predisposing to drug-induced haemolysis.
On the kinetic side, variation in metabolising enzymes such as the cytochromes and
plasma cholinesterase alters drug handling.
The field is moving towards individualised prescribing,
but its present anaesthetic relevance is chiefly in recognising and avoiding the
inherited susceptibilities that can be catastrophic.
Briefly, what is the difference between tolerance, dependence and addiction?
These are distinct, though related, phenomena.
Tolerance is a pharmacological reduction in effect with repeated use.
Physical dependence is a state in which abrupt cessation of the drug,
or administration of an antagonist, precipitates a withdrawal syndrome,
reflecting physiological adaptation;
it can occur with therapeutic use and does not itself imply misuse — a patient on
long-term opioids is dependent in this sense.
Addiction, by contrast, is a behavioural disorder characterised by compulsive
drug-seeking and use despite harm, with loss of control;
it has psychological and social dimensions beyond the pharmacological.
The distinction matters clinically and ethically,
because a dependent patient managed appropriately is not addicted,
and conflating the two can lead to under-treatment of pain or inappropriate
judgements.
Is there a pharmacodynamic basis to the placebo effect?
Yes — the placebo response is a genuine,
measurable phenomenon and not merely imagined.
It reflects the influence of expectation,
conditioning and context on the patient's physiology,
and it has demonstrable neurobiological correlates: placebo analgesia,
for instance, is associated with the release of endogenous opioids and can be
partially reversed by naloxone, indicating a real pharmacological pathway.
Its opposite, the nocebo effect, is the production of adverse effects by negative
expectation.
The practical importance is twofold:
placebo effects contribute to the response seen with any active treatment,
which is why controlled trials use placebo arms;
and the manner in which a drug or procedure is presented to a patient genuinely
influences the outcome, so communication is itself therapeutic.
Name some receptor systems of particular importance to the anaesthetist.
Several are central to practice. The GABA-A receptor,
a ligand-gated chloride channel, is the principal target of the intravenous
hypnotics and the benzodiazepines, and its subunit composition influences the
effects of different agents.
The N-methyl-D-aspartate, or NMDA, receptor, a glutamate-gated cation channel,
is blocked by ketamine and is implicated in analgesia and in central sensitisation.
The opioid receptors — mu, kappa and delta — are G-protein-coupled receptors
mediating analgesia and the characteristic side-effects.
The nicotinic acetylcholine receptor at the neuromuscular junction is the target of
the muscle relaxants.
And the adrenergic receptors, alpha and beta subtypes,
govern the cardiovascular drugs we use constantly.
Knowing the receptor, its type, and its signalling allows me to predict both the
wanted effect and the side-effects of the drugs acting upon it.
To close, summarise the continuum of drug efficacy at a receptor.
Efficacy can be seen as a continuum at a receptor that has some constitutive
activity. At one end is the full agonist,
which binds and produces the maximal response.
The partial agonist binds and activates but cannot reach the maximum,
and in the presence of a full agonist behaves partly as an antagonist.
The neutral, or silent, competitive antagonist binds but neither activates nor
suppresses, simply occupying the site and blocking others.
At the far end is the inverse agonist,
which binds and reduces the receptor's activity below its constitutive baseline.
Affinity is required of all of them, since all must bind;
what places a drug along the continuum is its intrinsic efficacy — its effect on
the receptor once bound.
Holding this single framework in mind allows the whole vocabulary of agonism and
antagonism to be organised coherently.
Explain the two-state model of receptor activation and how it accounts for the
efficacy continuum.
The two-state model proposes that a receptor exists in equilibrium between a
resting, inactive state and an active state, even in the absence of any drug;
the small proportion in the active state accounts for constitutive activity.
A drug influences this equilibrium according to its relative affinity for the two
states. A full agonist binds preferentially to and stabilises the active state,
shifting the equilibrium strongly towards activation.
A partial agonist has a smaller preference, producing a submaximal shift.
A neutral antagonist binds both states equally,
leaving the equilibrium unchanged but blocking other ligands.
An inverse agonist binds preferentially to the inactive state,
shifting the equilibrium away from activation and reducing constitutive activity
below baseline.
This model elegantly unifies the whole spectrum of efficacy as different effects on
a single conformational equilibrium,
rather than treating agonism and antagonism as wholly separate phenomena.
Use the quantal concept to explain the margin of safety at the neuromuscular
junction.
The neuromuscular junction has a large margin of safety:
far more acetylcholine is released, and far more receptors are available,
than the minimum needed to reach the threshold for a muscle action potential.
The consequence, related to receptor reserve,
is that a substantial proportion of the postsynaptic receptors — of the order of
seventy to eighty per cent — must be blocked by a non-depolarising relaxant before
any reduction in the twitch response is seen,
and around ninety per cent or more before transmission fails completely.
This is why clinical signs of recovery appear only when block has receded
substantially, and why quantitative monitoring with the train-of-four is necessary,
since clinical observation is insensitive to residual block.
The margin of safety is also the reason myasthenic patients,
with reduced functional receptors, are exquisitely sensitive to these drugs.
Give clinical examples of the different forms of antagonism used to reverse drug
effects.
Reversal in anaesthesia illustrates the forms of antagonism nicely.
Naloxone reverses opioids by competitive antagonism at the mu receptor — it is
surmountable, which is why a large opioid load can overcome a small naloxone dose,
and why its short duration risks re-narcotisation.
Flumazenil reverses benzodiazepines by competitive antagonism at the benzodiazepine
site.
Neostigmine reverses non-depolarising block not by antagonising the receptor but by
inhibiting acetylcholinesterase, raising acetylcholine to compete with the relaxant
— an indirect, ceiling-limited approach.
Sugammadex, by contrast, reverses the aminosteroid relaxants by chemical
antagonism, encapsulating the drug molecule in plasma and removing it from the
junction — a fundamentally different and more complete mechanism.
And in anaphylaxis adrenaline is a physiological antagonist of histamine,
acting at different receptors to oppose its effects.
Each example maps onto a category of antagonism.
What are the clinical uses and pitfalls of partial agonists?
Partial agonists are used where a submaximal, self-limiting effect is desirable.
Buprenorphine, a partial agonist at the mu opioid receptor,
provides analgesia with a ceiling effect on respiratory depression,
which can be a safety advantage, and its high affinity and slow dissociation make
it long-acting and useful in dependence treatment.
The pitfall is precisely that high affinity:
in a patient already receiving a full agonist,
a partial agonist can displace it and precipitate withdrawal or reduce analgesia,
and its effect can be difficult to reverse or to supplement with a full agonist
because it occupies the receptors.
Nalbuphine and other agonist-antagonists behave similarly.
So the partial agonist's ceiling is both its safety feature and its limitation,
and combining it carelessly with full agonists can produce unexpected loss of
effect.
How is the concentration-effect relationship modelled,
and why is the sigmoid shape important?
The relationship between effect-site concentration and effect is usually described
by the Emax model, in which effect rises with concentration towards a maximum,
Emax, with the concentration producing half-maximal effect being the EC-fifty.
Adding a slope factor gives the sigmoid Emax, or Hill, model,
which captures the characteristic S-shape when effect is plotted against the
logarithm of concentration.
The importance of the sigmoid shape is that the relationship is relatively flat at
very low and very high concentrations and steep in the middle:
in the steep central region small changes in concentration produce large changes in
effect, which is exactly the region in which we titrate anaesthesia,
so precise control is both most powerful and most demanding there.
The model underpins the way target-controlled and closed-loop systems relate
concentration to a desired depth.
Finally, why does individual variability oblige us to titrate rather than to dose
by formula?
Because the pharmacodynamic relationship between concentration and effect varies
between patients just as the kinetics do.
The same effect-site concentration may produce profound hypnosis in one patient and
inadequate anaesthesia in another, owing to differences in receptor sensitivity,
physiological state, age, disease, tolerance and genetics.
A formula gives only the population average,
around which real patients scatter widely,
and for drugs of narrow therapeutic index that scatter spans the distance between
under-dosing and harm.
Titration — giving a measured dose, observing the response,
and adjusting — closes the loop on the individual in front of me,
and depth-of-anaesthesia and neuromuscular monitoring formalise that feedback.
The principle is that I treat the patient's response, not a number,
and the pharmacology tells me how to interpret what I see.
Onset and offset of effect are often thought purely kinetic.
Is there a pharmacodynamic contribution?
There is, and it is easy to overlook.
The kinetics determine how quickly the concentration at the effect-site rises and
falls, but the pharmacodynamics determine how that changing concentration
translates into a changing effect, and the two combine to give the observed time
course.
The rate of receptor binding and, crucially, dissociation contributes:
a drug that dissociates slowly from its receptor will have an offset of effect that
outlasts the fall in its plasma concentration,
because the effect depends on receptor occupancy rather than on plasma drug alone.
The steepness of the concentration-effect curve also matters — on a steep curve the
effect switches on and off over a narrow concentration range,
sharpening the apparent onset and offset.
And where an active metabolite or an irreversible action is involved,
the effect may persist long after the parent drug has gone,
as with aspirin's irreversible inhibition of platelet cyclo-oxygenase,
whose effect lasts the lifetime of the platelet.
So onset and offset are a product of both disciplines, not kinetics alone.
Thank you. That was a thorough and well-structured account. Let us stop there.
Before we close, here are the take-home messages.
First, Pharmacodynamics is what the drug does to the body — the
concentration-effect relationship and its mechanisms — as distinct from
pharmacokinetics.
Second, Affinity governs binding and is shared by agonists and antagonists;
efficacy is the ability to activate once bound, and distinguishes full agonists,
partial agonists, antagonists and inverse agonists.
Third, Potency (position of the curve,
EC-fifty) and efficacy (height of the curve) are independent;
competitive antagonism is surmountable, non-competitive is not.
Fourth, The therapeutic index is the safety margin (toxic dose-fifty over effective
dose-fifty); many anaesthetic drugs have a narrow index and must be titrated under
monitoring.
Fifth, Synergy between drugs acting at different points of a pathway — the
propofol-opioid interaction — is both the efficiency and the hazard of combination
anaesthesia.
Thank you. That concludes the station.